hello maths fans dr tom crawford here
from the university of oxford
bringing you some christmas themed
calculus
there are two functions that we're going
to be investigating
the first one is given by z is equal to
minus x squared plus y
squared all to the power of one half
and the second function is going to be a
function of
x and y so f of x y
is going to be equal to m over
r squared e to the
r squared y
plus 5 over 2
x squared times m
minus a and our starting point is in
fact going to be
to try to plot the 3d graph
of this first function now the first
thing to spot with this function
is that z is always going to be negative
because of the minus sign
outside of the square root
also because we're adding together two
square numbers
they will each always be positive
therefore their sum
is positive and so the square root makes
sense so ultimately z is really just
determined
by the value of x squared plus y squared
and as both x and y change
x squared plus y squared will change and
that
ultimately will change z since we have
two variables that can both
change x and y what we're going to do is
actually consider
x squared plus y squared equal
to some constant value and let's call it
c squared so we know that x squared plus
y squared is a
positive commodity because it's two
squared numbers added together
so therefore if we square our constant
that emphasizes this positivity
of the function and what we want to do
is consider what this
looks like for different values of c
now some of you may recognize this
equation and actually know what the
graph of this function would look like
for different values of c
but don't worry if you've never seen it
before because we're going to go through
it
step by step and the first step in fact
is to make a trigonometric substitution
and all will become clear so do bear
with me if you've never seen this before
so we're going to let x be equal to
c times cos of theta
and then y is going to be c
times sine of theta
so when you substitute these two
expressions
into our equation we're going to get
c squared times cos
squared theta from the
x term plus c squared
times sine squared theta
from the y term and since we know that
cos squared plus sine squared is just
1 this does indeed equal
c squared so this substitution makes
complete sense and doesn't actually
alter
our original equation so
now we can plot these two values of x
and y
for different values of theta so if i
have my axes down here
so let's say this is x and this is y so
when theta is zero
which means along the x axis we measure
theta
from the positive x axis in that
direction
so when theta is zero i'm going to get x
is equal to c
and y will be zero so i'm going to be at
this point
down here c zero
now as i increase theta up to let's say
90 degrees or pi by two
then y is going to be equal to
c times sine of 90 that's one so c
and x is c times cos of 90 which is zero
so we're actually
at theta equals 90 we're up here
then as we increase three to further we
go to 180
that actually takes us to the point
minus c
so cos of pi is minus one so x is minus
c
sine of pi is zero so we get y and
you may have spotted the pattern this is
going to continue around
and so for 3 pi over 2 or 270 degrees
we get minus c down the bottom
now we don't yet know how to join up
these points again some of you may have
spotted what's happening
but if we think about values in between
so let's focus on this
first positive quadrant
so we know that this is theta equals
zero and we know that this one is theta
equals pi over two or two equals 90.
now as i increase theta cos
decreases away from one so cos is
decreasing so as i
increase theta the value of x is
decreasing
which is why we go from c back down to
zero
and at the same time the sine function
is increasing as theta goes from zero
through to 90 degrees or pi by 2.
so y is increasing as x is decreasing
and if you were to plot a few points in
between you'd get this lovely
curve shape between the two points
and as you may have guessed or may
already known
this is in fact drawing out a circle
so what we have from this equation x
squared plus y squared equals c
squared this is actually the equation
for a circle of radius
c so it would look
something try and join up these points
something like that and that's actually
a better circle than i was expecting now
how does this help us to plot our
original function
z equals minus the square root of x
squared plus
y squared well we have set x squared
plus y squared to be this constant
c square so if we substitute this in
what we've really got here is z equals
minus c and so as we
vary the value of c which remember we've
worked
out is the radius of our circle
as we vary the value of c z is just
equal to minus that value
so if we draw out lots of different
circles
for different values of the radius
what's going to happen is in three
dimensions
z takes the value c
as we move down the negative z
axis so putting all of this together to
create a 3d
picture near to the origin
so this point represents the origin near
to the origin
we're going to have a small circle
and z is going to be minus the radius of
that small circle so z
is very just a little bit below the x y
plane if that were going through this
horizontal line here through the origin
and then as we increase the radius of
our circle
z becomes more and more
negative so what we're really doing here
is adding together lots and lots of
circles
like this extending down and away
from zero so if we have this
as the x y plane
which is going to be flat at z equals
zero
through the origin then as we just draw
these circles
with increasing radius equal to c
z remember is now minus the radius of
the circle
so a little bit below zero we have a
small radius and as we get more and more
negative with zed larger overall size
the circles get bigger and bigger and so
this
actually creates a cone shape
and just to check that our intuition is
correct we can plot this function
z equals minus x squared plus y squared
all to the power of a half
in the maple calculator app and
as you can see we do indeed get this
lovely cone shape
in all of its three-dimensional glory
if i now add a star on top of our cone
shape and maybe a few blue
let's call them christmas baubles or
maybe even fairy lights who knows at
this point
then our cone has turned into a lovely
christmas tree sort of
now let's look at our second function f
of x
y is equal to m over r squared e to the
r squared y
plus five over two x squared multiplied
by m
minus a and we're going to be
calculating
some partial derivatives of this
function in fact we're going to be
working out the divergence
of f which i will explain very shortly
but before i get to that what we're
going to start with
is actually to simplify the functional
form of f and what i mean by this
is kind of group together all of these
various constants
to see what the real structure of the
function looks like
because x and y here are our only
variables
so everything else in the equation we've
got m
r and also an a they're all just
constants
so we can actually say that this is
approximately
we've got a constant times e to the
constant
y so let's say that's a
times e to the b y
where a is going to be m over r squared
and b
is going to be r squared and then we've
got plus
some other complicated constant
let's call it c so c is 5 over 2 times m
minus
a and that's all multiplied by x squared
so the functional form the general
structure of
f is constant e to the constant y
plus constant times x squared and this
makes it much easier now to actually
calculate those partial derivatives
df by dx and df by dy
we can actually go one step further and
assign numerical values to our constants
a b and c so for example if we set
a is equal to 1 b is 2 and c is equal to
then we can plot the function z equals
e to the 2 y plus 3 x squared
and doing this in the maple calculator
app
gives us something that i'm going to
call the chair function
you could even say that it perhaps looks
like a very budget version of santa's
sleigh
but again that might be a bit of a
stretch
if we now calculate the partial
derivatives for the
generalized function then we will get
df by dx
is going to be equal to 2
c x because the first term
only depends on y and so therefore we
ignore it
when we do the x partial derivative and
then d f
by d y
now we're only interested in the first
term because the second one
depends only on x and so therefore is
constant when doing the y
partial so this will give us the b will
come down
and we'll get b a e
to the b y now i mentioned before
that we actually want to calculate the
divergence of f
and the divergence of a function is
equal
to the sum of its partial
derivatives so in three dimensions
which is where this is traditionally
used this would be
df by dx plus df by dy plus df by dz
but since here we're working in 2d
and we just have a function of x and y
the divergence here
is equal to the sum of the partials
which here will be
df by dx plus
d f by d y
and this of course is exactly the same
as doing the f by d
y plus d f by d x so doing exactly that
we have that the divergence of f
is equal to b a
e to the b y plus
2 c x
and now remembering that we substituted
for a b and c
from our original expression for f
we can now substitute back to get the
final answer
for the divergence of f which is equal
to
m times e to the
r squared which is r times r y
plus x times
m minus a all multiplied by
five also known as merry christmas
so that just leaves me to say thank you
to everyone for watching
not only this video but all of my videos
from this past year i hope you've all
had as much fun watching them
as i know i have making them please do
remember to subscribe to my channel if
you haven't done so already
and i'll see you all in 2021
you